# Social Networks and Information Management Communication

### Over the last decade, online social networks have evolved into a global mainstream medium with increasing social,
organizational, and economic impact. This paper provides a structured overview of Information Systems research on
this outstanding techno-social phenomenon of the 21st century via a structured literature review. Based on our
search in information systems journals and conference proceedings that resulted in 510 papers, we carve out and
assess the knowledge and the research fields that have been predominantly addressed and impacted by the
information systems research community so far. Moreover, we identify research gaps that future research should
address. We analyze how the academic discussion on online social networks developed in the information systems
literature over time, which publication outlets are most receptive to research on online social networks, which
research areas have already been covered by information systems research on online social networks, and what
potential future research areas exist that have not been covered by information systems research yet. We hope that
our results will stimulate and guide future research in this field.

### Social networks provide a simple yet powerful abstraction for social scientists
  that can represent almost any type of human interaction or connection, including their structure and dynamics. Social
  network analysts observe a social world consisting of nodes (social or other types of units like
  persons, teams, organizations, or their combinations) and ties among them (connections like
  communications, dependence, or vicinity). These relatively simple discrete “ontologies” offer a
  surprisingly fruitful way to analyze how social formations organize, change, and grow. By focusing on
  networks, social scientists can explain: a) the observed structure of social formations and b) how the
  structure affects other critical traits of social units or formations such as their rate of innovation,
  change, performance, or operational failures
  Traditional approaches to social networks seek to explain and predict social interactions through
  network structures expressed in patterns of links among nodes. These approaches privilege the
  structural characteristics of the network (i.e., the patterns of connection among nodes) over individual
  attributes of the nodes and represent a shift in social inquiries away from atomistic approaches to
  contextual and relational ones. Consequently, social network approaches have been used in
  organizational studies in many ways (Monge and Contractor 2003; Borgatti and Foster 2003; Parkhe
  et al. 2006; Hoang and Antoncic 2003). They have been used to understand and explain the
  behaviors of multiple social formations including teams, organizations, industries, and most recently,
  technology-mediated communities (Barabasi 2003; Christakis and Fowler 2009; Monge and
  Contractor 2003; Nohria and Eccles 1992; Shapiro and Varian 1999). They have also been used to
  study different elements of such formations including social capital (Granovetter 1995; Burt 1992),
  embeddedness (Granovetter 1985; Uzzi 1997; Saxenian 1994), new structures (Powell 1990; Eccles
  1981), governance (Mizruchi 1996), joint ventures (Powell, Koput, and Smith-Doerr, 1996), and
  dynamics (Carley 1991; Ibarra 1992), among others.
  Recently, IS scholars have also started appropriating social network approaches (Agarwal et al. 2006).
  The IS research drawing on social networks can be divided into the following streams: 1) network
  awareness at both individual and organizational levels, 2) uses of social network analysis related to
  IS use, and 3) conceptual and technological change in the fast evolving platforms to manage social
  networks.
  First, network analysis helps increase organizational and individual network awareness (Steiny and
  Oinas-Kukkonen 2007). This involves depicting and understanding an individual’s linkages within and
  outside an organization, including determining who knows what (Hansen 1999; Majchrzak et al. 2007).
  This has become increasingly important in understanding the organization’s collective intelligence.
  Moreover, resources available for an organization to seek new knowledge can multiply through its
  social networks and related knowledge flows. Harvesting these networks is poorly understood and
  rarely well supported. Rendering informal networks visible helps managers to systematically assess
  and strategically support important collaboration. 